Create 2024-11-11-e2e-flyte-data-science-solution-on-aks.md (#4624)
Azure/AKS: blog/_posts/2024-11-11-e2e-flyte-data-science-solution-on-aks.md

---
title: "Deploy and 'take Flyte' with an end-to-end data science solution on AKS"
description: "Learn about the open-source Flyte tools and how to deploy them securely for your data science tasks on Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS)"
date: 2024-11-11
author: Sachi Desai
categories: ai
---

## Background

Data is often at the heart of application design and development - it fuels user-centric design, provides insights for feature enhancements, and represents the value of an application as a whole. In that case, shouldn’t we use data science tools and workflows that are flexible and scalable on a platform like Kubernetes, for a range of application types? 

In collaboration with [David Espejo](https://www.linkedin.com/in/davidmirror/) and [Shalabh Chaudhri](https://www.linkedin.com/in/shalabhchaudhri/) from [Union.ai](https://www.union.ai/), we’ll dive into an example using one of these tools built on Kubernetes itself, called Flyte. As a data science orchestration platform, Flyte can help you manage and scale out exploratory data analysis (EDA) and machine learning jobs through a simple user interface.

> ## First off, what is a Flyte cluster?

Author: ```suggestion
## What is a Flyte cluster, and who uses it?
```

> A Flyte cluster provides you an API endpoint to register, compile, and execute ML workflows on Kubernetes, and the main Flyte components (user plane, data plane, and control plane) are implemented as Pods.

Author: ```suggestion
A Flyte cluster provides you an API endpoint to register, compile, and execute ML workflows on Kubernetes, and the main Flyte components (user plane, data plane, and control plane) are implemented as Pods.

```

Identity management: Workload identity is enabled for authentication using Azure AD tokens - the `flytepropeller`, `flyteadmin`, and `datacatalog` backend components use one user-assigned MI, while the Flyte task execution pods use a different user-assigned MI.

Networking and security: TLDR: [insert diagram below]

Automatic upgrades: [TBD]

Container image management: Azure Container Registry (ACR) is created out-of-box with permissions for you to:
* Push all workflow output images to this private ACR, 
* Pull your custom images through task execution pods from the ACR (otherwise, a default container image is used for each Flyte workflow execution)

Monitoring: [Container Insights](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-monitor/containers/container-insights-analyze) is configured out-of-box, with system namespace logs and Flyte user workload logs ingested through Azure Monitor pipeline, to help you:
* Monitor workflow execution details from FlyteAdmin
* Troubleshoot deployment issues faster through Azure Portal
* Query historical logs using Log Analytics

> [insert screenshot of success FlyteAdmin logs retrieval through Log Analytics]

Author: ```suggestion
![image](AKS/assets/images/deploy-data-science-solution-with-flyte/flyte-admin-logs-view-log-analytics.png)
```

---
title: "Deploy and 'take Flyte' with an end-to-end data science solution on AKS"
description: "Learn about the open-source Flyte tools and how to deploy them securely for your data science tasks on Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS)"
date: 2024-11-11

> author: Sachi Desai

Reviewer: Not sure how exactly to do this, and you can ignore my suggestion here, but if there's any way to add my name either as an "author" or contributor, I'd really appreciate it!

categories: ai
---

## Background

> Data is often at the heart of application design and development - it fuels user-centric design, provides insights for feature enhancements, and represents the value of an application as a whole. In that case, shouldn’t we use data science tools and workflows that are flexible and scalable on a platform like Kubernetes, for a range of application types? 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data is often at the heart of application design and development; it fuels user-centric design, provides insights for feature enhancements, and represents the value of an application as a whole. In that case, shouldn’t we use data science tools and workflows that are flexible and scalable on a platform like Kubernetes for a range of application types? 
```

> In collaboration with [David Espejo](https://www.linkedin.com/in/davidmirror/) and [Shalabh Chaudhri](https://www.linkedin.com/in/shalabhchaudhri/) from [Union.ai](https://www.union.ai/), we’ll dive into an example using one of these tools built on Kubernetes itself, called Flyte. As a data science orchestration platform, Flyte can help you manage and scale out exploratory data analysis (EDA) and machine learning jobs through a simple user interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In collaboration with [David Espejo](https://www.linkedin.com/in/davidmirror/) and [Shalabh Chaudhri](https://www.linkedin.com/in/shalabhchaudhri/) from [Union.ai](https://www.union.ai/), we’ll dive into an example using one of these tools built on Kubernetes itself, called *Flyte*. As a data science orchestration platform, Flyte can help you manage and scale out exploratory data analysis (EDA) and machine learning jobs (ML) through a simple user interface.
```

## What is a Flyte cluster, and who uses it?

A Flyte cluster provides you an API endpoint to register, compile, and execute ML workflows on Kubernetes, and the main Flyte components (user plane, data plane, and control plane) are implemented as Pods.

Adopters of Flyte include organizations running large-scale data operations and ML operations, including social media platforms, music/video streaming services, and bioinformatics companies.

> With a fully-configured Flyte cluster, you can:
> * Process and visualize large, dynamic data sets and ensure up-to-date information retrieval
> * Deploy ML workflows
> * Track parallel and sequential Flyte tasks in your ML pipeline
> * …and more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With a fully configured Flyte cluster, you can:

* Process and visualize large, dynamic data sets and ensure up-to-date information retrieval.
* Deploy ML workflows.
* Track parallel and sequential Flyte tasks in your ML pipeline.
* …and more!
```

Starting with this [reference implementation](https://www.union.ai/blog-post/flyte-on-azure-a-reference-implementation), you'll be able to take a basic Azure resource group and build an end-to-end data science solution on a working Flyte cluster.

> [!NOTE]

> > This example deploys Flyte as an open-source tool on your cluster, and it is not a managed feature on Azure Kubernetes Service today.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This example deploys Flyte as an open-source tool on your cluster. Currently, it's not a managed feature on Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS).
```

## Let's get started

> Before you begin, take a look at the [prerequisite](https://github.com/unionai-oss/deploy-flyte/blob/main/environments/azure/flyte-core/README.md#prerequisites) steps on Azure, including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you begin, take a look at the [prerequisites](https://github.com/unionai-oss/deploy-flyte/blob/main/environments/azure/flyte-core/README.md#prerequisites) on Azure, including:
```

> * Azure subscription with at least [Contributor role over all your resources](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/role-based-access-control/built-in-roles/privileged#contributor) using Azure RBAC
> * Azure CLI version 2.0 or later installed and configured
> * Terraform version 1.3.7 or later installed
> * Helm version 3.15.4 or later installed
> * Kubernetes command-line client, [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/), installed and configured

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Azure subscription with at least [Contributor role over all your resources](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/role-based-access-control/built-in-roles/privileged#contributor) using Azure RBAC.
* Azure CLI version 2.0 or later installed and configured.
* Terraform version 1.3.7 or later installed.
* Helm version 3.15.4 or later installed.
* Kubernetes command-line client, [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/), installed and configured.
```

> ## Which Flyte backend components are installed, and what do they do?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Which Flyte back-end components are installed, and what do they do?
```

In your end-to-end solution, each of the following Flyte backend components will run on its own pod:

| Flyte component | Description |
| -- | -- | 

> | Data catalog | Service that simplifies data indexing and allows you to query data artifacts based on metadata and/or tags |
> | Flyte pod webhook | Deployment that creates the Webhook Pod called by ApiServer, when a simple Flyte task launches a Pod |
> | Flyte admin | Main Flyte API that processes client requests, see [API specification](https://docs.flyte.org/en/latest/api/flyteidl/docs/service/service.html#ref-flyteidl-service-admin-proto) |
> | Flyte console | Web user interface for the Flyte platform, hosted in the same Flyte cluster as Admin API |
> | Flyte propeller | Core engine that executes workflows within the Flyte data plane |
> | Flyte scheduler | Cloud-agnostic native scheduler for fixed-rate and cron-based schedules, defined at the init time for your workflow and activated/deactivated using FlyteAdmin API |
> | Sync resources | Type of agent that enables request/response services (e.g. APIs) to return outputs |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Data catalog | Service that simplifies data indexing and allows you to query data artifacts based on metadata and/or tags. |
| Flyte pod webhook | Deployment that creates the Webhook Pod called by API Server, when a simple Flyte task launches a Pod. |
| Flyte admin | Main Flyte API that processes client requests, see [API specification](https://docs.flyte.org/en/latest/api/flyteidl/docs/service/service.html#ref-flyteidl-service-admin-proto). |
| Flyte console | Web user interface for the Flyte platform, hosted in the same Flyte cluster as Admin API. |
| Flyte propeller | Core engine that executes workflows within the Flyte data plane .|
| Flyte scheduler | Cloud-agnostic native scheduler for fixed-rate and cron-based schedules, defined at the init time for your workflow and activated/deactivated using FlyteAdmin API. |
| Sync resources | Type of agent that enables request/response services (e.g. APIs) to return outputs. |
```

Once you've applied and generated the reference Flyte Terraform, you'll receive an endpoint to your Flyte cluster and verify a similar output to the status below:

```bash
kubectl get pods -n flyte

NAME                                 READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
datacatalog-6864645db6-99msb         1/1     Running   0          6m45s
flyte-pod-webhook-848d7db899-8wltj   1/1     Running   0          6m45s
flyteadmin-6cc67b49b4-cmt7j          1/1     Running   0          6m45s
flyteconsole-68f677797f-p4s98        1/1     Running   0          6m45s
flytepropeller-b88f7bf6d-lqc8s       1/1     Running   0          6m45s
flytescheduler-844db4658c-hfrhv      1/1     Running   0          6m45s
syncresources-767d7fc77b-5mj6n       1/1     Running   0          6m45s
```

## Which AKS features are built into my Flyte solution?

> Storage: Cost-effective general-purpose v2 Storage Account with Hierarchical Namespace enabled to support the blob storage resource, and a default storage container to store metadata and raw data.
> Your metadata might consist of task inputs/outputs, data serialization format (protocol buffers), etc, while raw data will be unprocessed data and large objects that execution pods read from/write to the storage container.
> 
> Compute: You’ll start with a Standard_D2_v2 CPU node pool of size 1, with [cluster autoscaler](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/cluster-autoscaler?tabs=azure-cli) enabled on your AKS cluster to meet workload demands. As your workflow or application submits an increasing number of Flyte tasks, cluster autoscaler will watch for pending pods and scale up your node pool size (in this case, to a maximum of 10 nodes) to minimize downtime due to resource constraints.
> 
> > [!TIP]
> > To create a GPU-enabled node pool using your `aks.tf` [configuration file](https://github.com/unionai-oss/deploy-flyte/blob/main/environments/azure/flyte-core/aks.tf), update the `gpu_node_pool_count` and `gpu_machine_type` to your desired node count and instance type, respectively, in the `locals` array. If you specify an `accelerator` type, make sure to select a [supported option](https://github.com/flyteorg/flytekit/blob/daeff3f5f0f36a1a9a1f86c5e024d1b76cdfd5cb/flytekit/extras/accelerators.py#L132-L160) for flytekit.
> 
> Identity management: [Workload Identity](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/workload-identity-overview?tabs=dotnet) is enabled for authentication using Azure AD tokens - the `flytepropeller`, `flyteadmin`, and `datacatalog` backend components use one user-assigned MI, while the Flyte task execution pods use a separate user-assigned MI.
> 
> Networking and security: TLDR: [insert diagram below]
> 
> Automatic cluster upgrades: AKS cluster [auto-upgrade](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/auto-upgrade-cluster?tabs=azure-cli#cluster-auto-upgrade-channels) is enabled by default to minimize workload downtime and stay up-to-date on the latest AKS patches. The reference Flyte Terraform plan sets `automatic_upgrade_channel = "stable"`, ensuring that the AKS cluster created will always remain in a [supported version](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/auto-upgrade-cluster?tabs=azure-cli#best-practices-for-cluster-auto-upgrade) (i.e. within the N-2 rule).
> 
> Container image management: Azure Container Registry (ACR) is created out-of-box with permissions for you to:
> * Push all workflow output images to this private ACR, 
> * Pull your custom images through task execution pods from the ACR (otherwise, a default container image is used for each Flyte workflow execution)
> 
> Monitoring: [Container Insights](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-monitor/containers/container-insights-analyze) is configured out-of-box, with system namespace logs and Flyte user workload logs ingested through Azure Monitor pipeline, to help you:
> * Monitor workflow execution details from FlyteAdmin
> * Troubleshoot deployment issues faster through Azure Portal
> * Query historical logs using Log Analytics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Storage

Cost-effective general-purpose v2 Storage Account with Hierarchical Namespace enabled to support the blob storage resource, and a default storage container to store metadata and raw data.

Your metadata might consist of task inputs/outputs, data serialization format (protocol buffers), etc., while raw data will be unprocessed data and large objects that execution pods read from/write to the storage container.

### Compute

You’ll start with a Standard_D2_v2 CPU node pool of size 1, with [cluster autoscaler](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/cluster-autoscaler) enabled on your AKS cluster to meet workload demands. As your workflow or application submits an increasing number of Flyte tasks, cluster autoscaler will watch for pending pods and scale up your node pool size (in this case, to a maximum of 10 nodes) to minimize downtime due to resource constraints.

> [!TIP]
> To create a GPU-enabled node pool using your `aks.tf` [configuration file](https://github.com/unionai-oss/deploy-flyte/blob/main/environments/azure/flyte-core/aks.tf), update the `gpu_node_pool_count` and `gpu_machine_type` to your desired node count and instance type, respectively, in the `locals` array. If you specify an `accelerator` type, make sure to select a [supported option](https://github.com/flyteorg/flytekit/blob/daeff3f5f0f36a1a9a1f86c5e024d1b76cdfd5cb/flytekit/extras/accelerators.py#L132-L160) for flytekit.

### Identity management

[Workload Identity](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/workload-identity-overview) is enabled for authentication using Azure AD tokens - the `flytepropeller`, `flyteadmin`, and `datacatalog` backend components use one user-assigned MI, while the Flyte task execution pods use a separate user-assigned MI.

### Networking and security

TLDR: [insert diagram below]

### Automatic cluster upgrades

AKS cluster [auto-upgrade](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/auto-upgrade-cluster#cluster-auto-upgrade-channels) is enabled by default to minimize workload downtime and stay up-to-date on the latest AKS patches. The reference Flyte Terraform plan sets `automatic_upgrade_channel = "stable"`, ensuring that the AKS cluster created will always remain in a [supported version](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/auto-upgrade-cluster#best-practices-for-cluster-auto-upgrade) (i.e. within the N-2 rule).

### Container image management

Azure Container Registry (ACR) is created out-of-box with permissions for you to:

* Push all workflow output images to this private ACR.
* Pull your custom images through task execution pods from the ACR (otherwise, a default container image is used for each Flyte workflow execution).

### Monitoring

[Container Insights](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/azure-monitor/containers/container-insights-analyze) is configured out-of-box, with system namespace logs and Flyte user workload logs ingested through Azure Monitor pipeline, to help you:

* Monitor workflow execution details from FlyteAdmin.
* Troubleshoot deployment issues faster through Azure Portal.
* Query historical logs using Log Analytics.
```

![image](AKS/assets/images/deploy-data-science-solution-with-flyte/flyte-admin-logs-view-log-analytics.png)

![image](AKS/assets/images/deploy-data-science-solution-with-flyte/successful-flyte-deployment-on-aks.png)

## What next?

> * See Union.ai's blog post about [Flyte on Azure](https://www.union.ai/blog-post/flyte-on-azure-a-reference-implementation)
> * Check out more ML and feature engineering [tutorials with Flyte](https://docs.flyte.org/en/latest/flytesnacks/tutorials/index.html)
> * Learn about [best practices for your MLOps pipelines](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/best-practices-ml-ops) on Azure Kubernetes Service 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* See Union.ai's blog post about [Flyte on Azure](https://www.union.ai/blog-post/flyte-on-azure-a-reference-implementation).
* Check out more ML and feature engineering [tutorials with Flyte](https://docs.flyte.org/en/latest/flytesnacks/tutorials/index.html).
* Learn about [best practices for your MLOps pipelines](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/best-practices-ml-ops) on Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS).
```

* Push all workflow output images to this private ACR.
* Pull your custom images through task execution pods from the ACR (otherwise, a default container image is used for each Flyte workflow execution).

### Monitoring

[Container Insights](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/azure-monitor/containers/container-insights-analyze) is configured out-of-box, with system namespace logs and Flyte user workload logs ingested through Azure Monitor pipeline, to help you:

* Monitor workflow execution details from FlyteAdmin.
* Troubleshoot deployment issues faster through Azure Portal.
* Query historical logs using Log Analytics.

![image](AKS/assets/images/deploy-data-science-solution-with-flyte/flyte-admin-logs-view-log-analytics.png)

![image](AKS/assets/images/deploy-data-science-solution-with-flyte/successful-flyte-deployment-on-aks.png)

## What next?

* See Union.ai's blog post about [Flyte on Azure](https://www.union.ai/blog-post/flyte-on-azure-a-reference-implementation).
* Check out more ML and feature engineering [tutorials with Flyte](https://docs.flyte.org/en/latest/flytesnacks/tutorials/index.html).

> * Learn about [best practices for your MLOps pipelines](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/best-practices-ml-ops) on Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS).

Author: ```suggestion
* Learn about [best practices for your MLOps pipelines](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/aks/best-practices-ml-ops) on Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS).

## Acknowledgements

Shoutout to [Erin Schaffer](https://www.linkedin.com/in/erin-schaffer-65800215b/) for her contributions and feedback on this blog!
```
